# First Hand Accounts of the Vicini


First hand accounts, reveal the level to which the Palazzo's architectural layout served a socio­political function.  In his memoir, Marco Parenti, emphasizes the importance of these visitors in his discussion of the events following Cosimo's death in 1464.  Piero, Cosimo’s son, suffered a great lack of support after the death of his father.  Parenti highlighted this fact by stating, "that few frequented his house and they were men of little consequence."  Meanwhile, the usurper to Medici power, Luca Pitti "held court at his house, where a large part of the citizens went to consult on matters of govemment."   Several months later the power shifted back to the Medici and Parenti noted that Luca Pitti “remained cold and alone at home, and no one visited him to talk about political affairs-he who used to have his house full of every kind of person.''   Consequently, a lack of visitors revealed the poor political standing of the leading citizens of Florence.

Another account that enlightens our examination of the process and tradition of waiting to have an audience with a Medici patriarch is found in an account from the memoirs of Tribaldo de’Rossi.  Tribaldo came to the Palazzo Medici six days in a row seeking an audience with Lorenzo, Cosimo’s grandson.  He sat and waited alongside the other vicino there seeking audience with Lorenzo.  At last “on the seventh day, Lorenzo put on his coat and came down to the courtyard and gave audience.  Ser Piero told me repeatedly to stay close to him, and that he would tell him that I was there, [we] being at the gate of the courtyard leading out into the street."   Tribaldo was able to begin his petition but his time and pleas were cut short, however, when they reached the street-side of the gate and “Lorenzo was forced to give audience to the forty or more citizens who also demanded his attention.”  This account typifies the average experience of the uninvited vicino to the Palazzo Medici.  The time spent waiting for contact with the Medici was extensive.

We have, through these personal accounts, explained the reasons the vicino sought audience and the time that could be invested in the endeavor.  Generally, scholars use these accounts as a way to explain the shifting power in Republican Florence or the societal ritual of patronage.  Although these are important scholarly pursuits as stated previously, what is often ignored is the part the Palazzo itself played.

Florence, like other states of Italian peninsula, found great value in connecting its history with that of ancient Rome. The Republican structure of government that Florence adopted, in emulation of Rome, relied upon specific citizens speaking for the good of those they represented. In both cultures, these citizens were chosen for their ability to enact change at one moment and prevent it at another; that is, they were selected by the power they wielded. The dependent citizens, or clients, flocked to the house of this powerful person, or patron, in the hopes that he would grant them a favor, likely in return for something the visitor could provide him. This system of patronage is the key to understanding not only the writings of Vitruvius, but also the actions and choices of the Medici. The decision to adapt the layout of an ancient Roman domus for the Palazzo Medici reflects, at the very least for Cosimo, a desire to identify the family with the position of patron.  The courtyard facilitated, architecturally, the desired interaction between a visitor/client, and the Medici/patron.  A visitor, such as de'Rossi, who waited for the Medici within the courtyard, was given ample opportunity to consider the space around him. With little else to do until the Medici family member he sought appeared, a visitor likely contemplated the home of his patron.
