# A Phenomenological Approach to what the visitors viewed at the Palazzo Medici and the message they took away

In order to illustrate how the Medici used their palace to convey specific messages to specific constituents, the method of inquiry used here is Phenomenology.   This is a broad discipline primarily developed by German philosophers Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger.  Phenomenology is based on the premise that "reality consists of objects and events, or phenomena, as they are perceived or understood in the human consciousness, and not of anything independent of human consciousness.”

Phenomenology is a method of studying experience and how human experience informs their view and interaction with the world.  It looks at the human experience through the structures of the conscious experience from a subjective first person point of view.  The way an experience is directed toward an individual object in the world is called its intentionality.  This can then be analyzed through the lens of the conditions of the possibility of intentionality including social practices, language, shared history, and customs. This method of study not only includes passive experiences of sensory perception, but also "imagination, thought, emotion, desire, volition, and action.”    

Wolfgang Iser, a German literary scholar, posits the idea that the author of a text does not construct the meaning of a text wholly, but instead, the meaning is a point where the polarity of the reader and the author converge, he calls this Reader Response Theory.  The text is the object, created by the author, and the aesthetic/realization is a task undertaken by the reader.  This polarity is resolved when the two poles come together to generate the meaning of the text.  Iser states, "text only takes on life when it is realized.”  The author composes a text for a reader; this reader is not an actual definitive person but an essential working part in the creation of meaning.  The reader brings his or her life experiences to the process and is an active participant, along with the narrator, the characters, and the plot.  The reader fulfills his engagement with the text and the aforementioned participants causing them to converge within the reader’s imagination creating a “gestalt,” or an organized whole that is greater than the sum of its parts.

Iser’s theory of Reader Response is also useful in examining art.  Reader Response Theory can be conformed to enlighten us on how the aesthetic object (artwork) is not based only on the subjective input of the viewer, but also determined by the specific signs that a text (artwork) presents to its subject. The structure of the work, as created, brings about expectations.  These expectations are often interrupted or unfulfilled, producing “gaps’ which impel the viewer to create a coherent flow of the theme of the work. These "gaps" force the viewer to go back and reevaluate his past assumptions, so they will coherently flow with the new interpretations.  The "gap" has caused the viewer to make a new dimension of reality.   The dialectical act of viewing a piece of art is seen in the need to decipher, which develops our “deciphering capacity” which brings forward a component of our being of which we are not directly conscious.  Viewing art allows us to “formulate ourselves and to discover what had previously seemed to elude our consciousness.” citation needed Iser

This theory highlights the ways in which a work of art or architecture uses our personal experience and history to expand the meaning of the message.  The intra-subjectivity of each individual viewer dynamically engages with the art to produce an individual experience.  As Iser says, we build a “virtual” environment that would normally be unavailable to us.  The viewer is an essential part of the creative process.  A work is not complete until it is experienced; this is when it comes to life.  

The Medici created many objects to signal the viewer.  They used the aesthetics of architecture, art, and decoration to convey messages and influence the discourse of Florence.  One of the most studied works of art the Medici are responsible for is the bronze David by Donatello.  This work is famous for many reasons and scholars still have not come to much consensus on its “real” meaning.  Scholars agree on one thing; the bronze David is the first nude sculpture since the Classical Period, and this is singular agreed upon fact that begins most scholarly discussions of the piece.  I, however, believe if we look at the bronze David through the eyes and consciousness’s of the viewers it was created for, we may find answers to these questions.

For the purposes of this discussion, we must assume a set of circumstances, that are extremely likely to be factual but can not be proven by actual documentation.   We must assume the even though Donatello sculpted the work, it was at the behest of Cosimo de Medici.  Most scholars concede this point, though there is no actual written evidence of it.  He, after all, was the greatest patron of art in Florence and the statue was to grace his new palazzo.  Cosimo was well educated in humanism and was quite knowledgeable of the Classical past.  He spent much of his wealth in pursuit of ancient manuscripts.  As a young man, he sought them out personally traveling throughout Europe and searching ancient monasteries.  Once he became the patriarch of the Medici family, he sponsored others to do this important work for him.

Using these assumptions will allow is to look at the bronze David in a new light.  It will reveal new insights into the Medici message and the realization of that message by two different types of viewer.  Using a Phenomenological approach, and allowing each viewer to use his own experience, history, and culture to fill in the gaps and complete the message, we can present a case study on Reader Response Theory and gain insight into Cosimo’s messages.

#The Vicini’s visit to the Palazzo Medici

As the common citizen moves through the streets of Florence, he feels at home.  This is his city.  He is part of the Medici faction.  The faction, at this moment in time, is the most powerful faction in the city.  The Medici have accumulated more wealth and more influence than any other family in Florence.  They have a vast network of associates, including many common citizens.  This particular common citizen is traveling through Florence to visit his patron, Cosimo de Medici.  He could be making this visit to seek a favor, to have Cosimo settle a dispute, or to help his patron by returning a kindness shown him previously.  Whatever the circumstance for the visit, he is upholding the tradition of “salutatio.”  Salutatio is the ritual of the client/patron relationship.  The client visits the patron's home on a regular basis to give and receive favors.  This was a crucial part of daily life in Florence.  Salutatio is how things get done.  	

As he approaches the Palazzo Medici, he would be confronted by the shear size of the building.  This building is the newest and most modern in Florence.  It was designed by Cosimo to create a specific message for the members of his faction and the wider world.  The impression the building makes on the citizen is one of awe and gratitude; awe because of its magnificence and gratitude because he is part of the leading faction in the city.  As he enters the androne (open hallway) that led from the street and opens to the courtyard, he is meet by throngs of people.  This is another validation of the citizen’s choice to belong to the Medici faction.  The more clients one has, the larger network one controls.  Once inside the courtyard, he finds a seat on the long wooden benches that line the walls inside the courtyard.  No matter where he sits, he is confronted with the central visual figure of the space, the bronze David.  As he waits for his audience with his patron, he has time to allow his eyes to linger over the statue.

Each work of art has two poles, as Iser states.   The artistic is the work conceived by Cosimo, the statue, and the aesthetic, which is the realization of the work by the viewer.  This theory means that the statue, as conceived by Cosimo, is sending a message or telling a story, but it is not yet complete.  It can only be complete when the viewer participates and adds his/her own imagination, history, culture, and social class to the mix.  When these two poles come together and attempt to coalesce, the virtuality of the work emerges.  This productive process creates a new reality that did not exist previously.  

Just as literary texts are constructed of sentences, art is constructed of many separate, but connected elements.  The elements, each one taken alone, can not tell the story of the work.  Each is a part that adds to the whole, but the sum of all the elements does not make up the whole.  The viewer must participate and incorporate the elements that fit into his personal, individual narrative to complete the work and the meaning.  

This viewer is a common man.  He is probably illiterate but not completely uneducated.  He knows the Bible, the teachings of the Church, and some of the mythological tales from ancient Greece and Rome.  He sees the statue and immediately identifies it.  Knowing the Bible, he knows that this is a young King David.  The statue is a depiction of the glorious moment when David slew Goliath, with the help of God.  This Biblical association is now his primary reference point or pre-intention.  As he studies it further, he quickly realizes that David is naked.  The element of nudity is not what he expects.  This unexpected component develops the work in a way contrary to this viewer’s assumptions.  This change of tone, or modification, creates a gap in the flow of the work.  This allows the viewer to make decisions about the meaning of the text.  These decisions are, in most cases, made subconsciously.  Each viewer fills in the gaps in the story with his own individual choices and decisions, making each person's experience of the work different.    

Next, he would see the plaque and its text, which is affixed to the pedestal and the holds the statue.  He may or may not be able to read it, but its wording would be readily known.

  >“The victor is whoever defends the fatherland. God crushes the wrath of an enormous foe. Behold! A boy overcame a >great tyrant. Conquer, o citizens!”

The common man’s background, education, and class status result in an understanding of the message in one of two ways.  He could simply equate it with the Biblical story of David and his conquering of the Philistines.  He could also assume a more nuanced meaning, taking into account the recent history of Florence and its experience with a tyrant, the so-called Duke of Athens, who ruled Florence in the past but was expelled by the citizens.  In addition, Florence had recently fended off the Duke of Milan; the most overt enemy of the city, when no one in Tuscany thought Florence had a chance to prevail.  The message on the plaque, commingled with the viewer’s individualized and nuanced understanding of the message, realizes the virtual meaning as experienced by the viewer.   The other elements of the statue would probably be beyond his ability to interpret.  He comes away from the Palazzo Medici and its statue of David with the impression that the Medici designed specifically for him.  He is grateful for his inclusion in the most powerful faction in the city.  He is reassured that the Medici are God fearing, pious Christians.  From this, he concludes that the Medici are not tyrants, but tyrant slayers, and that they hold only the best intentions for the Republic of Florence.  

Cosimo commissioned the David to signal to his client/viewer a message that ensured his clients remained loyal.  He used architecture and art to control the discourse of Florence.  Cosimo’s message to the common citizen is,  “We have influence, we are God fearing, and we are powerful, but we only wield that power for the good of the Republic.”  

#The Amici’s visit to the Palazzo Medici

To further illustrate how the Reader Response Theory provides inexhaustible meanings to a work of art, we will now view the same statue through the eyes of the amici or friends of Cosimo.  Cosimo surrounded himself with intellectuals and artists throughout this life.  These men were thinkers, philosophers, and artists of all kinds.  Cosimo’s dedication to humanism and the Classical learning can not be understated.  He believed in the ideas and the ways of Classical past and thought they could help man rise to his fullest potential.  Cosimo was a prominent businessman who used his wealth to fund the Humanist Movement.  Cosimo, of course, played host to his friends often, financially supporting many of them.  When a friend visited the Palazzo Medici courtyard and gazed upon the bronze David, did he “see” something different than what the common man saw?  

As Cosimo’s friend arrives at the Palazzo, he also takes in the beauty and size of the building.  His impressions are much like the common man’s as it pertains to the architecture and grandeur of the building and the space it creates.  The differences begin when the friend sees the David.  His first impression may be the same as the citizen’s, the familiar Biblical David slaying Goliath.  Unlike the common citizen though, this friend has an extensive humanist education, which allows him to see much more in the work.  Again, the nudity may be contrary to the viewer’s expectation.  This creates a gap for the friend, as it did for the citizen.  The difference here is that the well-educated friend can choose a different way to bridge this gap based on his own life and experience.  The friend sees this as signal to look closer, to examine more elements of the work to uncover more information and connections.  This process of anticipation leads the viewer to form a new virtual dimension.  This act creates an active experience for the viewer.  This process creates a viewer experience that is similar to his own life experience, but not identical.  It takes him to a new virtual place that is located somewhere between himself and the creator of the work.  

As previously noted, the nudity of David blocks the viewer’s expectations.  The viewer must use his personal experience, education, history, and culture to make choices to reinterpret his previous assumptions.  The educated friend is aware of the conviction, in Quattrocento Florence among humanists, that beneath the surface of pagan beliefs lay a divine truth that could be reconciled with Christian beliefs.  Many humanists believed that a harmonic convergence of Pagan and Christian ideas could lead to the discovery of the unity of truth and a single reconcilable whole.   This leads the friend to reconsider his previous assumptions.  There is no similar iconography portraying David as nude shepherd boy, but the parallels in Ovid’s Metamorphosis to the god Mercury are clear and would be easily recognizable to Cosimo’s humanist friends.   If the friend subscribed to what Trinkaus calls the “universalization of multiple human traditions”  he would retrospectively adjust his earlier assumptions.  As he continued to notice more elements of the work, he sees the large sword David holds in one hand and the rock he seemingly hides in his other hand.  This is yet another connection to Mercury.  Although there is no rock throwing in Ovid’s tale, in a sixteenth-century account of this tale, Natale Conti adds an episode where Mercury intends to kill Argus with a stone.   This episode draws the two stories even closer together.  This knowledge allows the viewer to reinforce his “new” hypothesis.  The friend’s individual and unique decisions allow him to contribute to the work.  His effort and participation with the work bring the two poles closer to convergence.  This movement allows the viewer to experience a new and different space in which he can experience the meaning of the work in way that is unlike any other viewer.    

Cosimo was a man who outwardly and publically displayed the values of the past.  As Europe emerged from the Late Middle Ages, it left behind a largely cashless society of small communes where people relied on their neighbors for survival and their lives revolved around religion.  As Florence became the epicenter of trade and banking, she also became the center of learning.  Cosimo and his colleagues were dedicated to Classical ideas and philosophy.  Cosimo felt the secret to the progress of man and the development of civic society could be found in the Classical past.  His most numerous constituents though were the common citizens, still enamored by the Church and religion, which kept his faction strong.  He accommodated both these constituencies in his palazzo and its decoration.  Cosimo used multiple layers of meaning in the David. He crafted the work to speak the “Christian, anti-tyrant” message to the common man and he crafted the “reverence for the Classical past” message for his humanist associates.    
